---
title: From python script to package
layout: post
---


# Start with just a script

Your project is about spamming things; you kind of know a-priori that
in C++ it'd be a library called libspam; however, you're using python
for some reason.  To this end, start with a simple script called
`spam.py` in a directory called `spam`.

    spam
    └── spam.py

`spam.py` is just a script; it doesn't have any functions.

# Progress to a module

After a little while, the spamming gets quite large.  You need another
script called `bar.py` that also spams, but differently, so you want
to split the spamming out to a library.

To do this, move the common code into functions in the same file
called `spam.py`, but move the different bits into distinct scripts:

    spam
    ├── bar.py
    ├── foo.py
    └── spam.py

So, `spam.py` contains a common function called `spam()`.

Then in `foo.py` you can say

    import spam

and it will find your new library and import it.  In python-speak,
`spam.py` is now a module.  Python will find it even without setting
`PYTHONPATH`.  However, your function is now accessed as
`spam.spam()`, which is stupid.  So, this is better:

    from spam import *

Or this:

    from spam import spam

Now it's just `spam()`.


# And to a package

After a while, `spam.py` might get quite big, including `Spam` and
`Eggs` classes (classes are CamelCase in python).  So you tend to want
to split it up.  The first thing might be to put the eggy bits into a
file called `eggs.py`:

    spam
    ├── bar.py
    ├── foo.py
    ├── spam.py
    └── eggs.py

However, there's now no relationship between these for python.  To
enforce that, put them both in a directory like this:

    spam
    ├── bar.py
    ├── foo.py
    └── spam
        ├── __init__.py
        ├── spam.py
        └── eggs.py

In python speak, `spam` is now a package.  `__init__.py` can be
empty; it just means "this is a package" to the python interpretter.
`import spam` still finds everything.  Python will still find it
without setting `PYTHONPATH`.

There are now a lot of things called `spam` though.  You can say
(somewhat absurdly)

    import spam
    s = new spam.spam.Spam

It's tricky to see a way around this.

As a C++ programmer, one sensible way seems to be to put classes in
files named for the class, so there's a class `Spam` in a file
`spam.py` in the directory `spam` (as implied above).  Then put this
in `__init__.py`:

    from spam import *
    from eggs import *

And in `foo.py` you can say

    from spam import Spam
    from spam import Eggs
    s = new Spam
    e = new Eggs

So, the `__init__.py` file can squash some of the namespace madness
that the file hierarchy introduces.  Python people don't appear to
think this is sensible though.  They would have you put related
classes into one file.  This has the side-effect of leading to big
files that are tricky to navigate.
