---
title: Why Python is not my favourite programming language
layout: post
---

# Too many data types.

Hey, let's use a list as a fundamental data type!  But lists are too heavy, so
let's have a tuple too so we can do things like index on lists.  And we have
associative arrays too.  But instead of using the keys of the associative array
to make a list with unique entries, let's define a set.

Oh, and lists are too heavy so let's have arrays too!  But they're not packed,
so in numpy let's have another type of packed array; and use all possible data
types while we're at it.

# But we don't want syntactic sugar!

So, even though a switch statement would make a whole lot of code much easier
to read, it ain't there.


# Numpy and Scipy

Numpy is numerical, so let's define an FFT in it!  Oh, but scipy is scientific
and science has FFTs too, so let's have a different FFT in scipy.  But neither
of those are right, so in Bob, let's include FFTW 'cos that's the fastest!
...but it isn't (none of them are); the right answer is the one that's written
by the CPU manufacturer.

# Six!

Lotsa people use python 2, but we kinda got that one wrong so we made python 3
to be non-backwards-compatible.  But nobody used python 3 (even after, like,
eight years!).  So we have python "six", which blurs the distinction between
them.

# Join

It's normal to define split() that splits an array and join() that joins it
back together again.  But just to obfuscate things, even though join()
fundamentally operates on lists, let's define it to be a method on the string
class.

# Modules

Let's have both files and directory structures directly tied to the namespace,
so if you try to structure your code, it's reflected in a stupidly long
namespace.  So, if you have a module that implements basically one (you'd
imagine non-trivial) function, you have to type
```
import directory.file.Function
```
to get at it.  e.g.,
```
import fft.fft.fft
```

# Indentation

Let's let indentation dictate lexical scope!  Let's even have a guideline that
indentation is four spaces.  But four is too much, so some people use two.  And
when you try to paste code from one convention to the other, the scope breaks.
And since there are no other clues about the intended scope, the editor has no
clue how to fix it.  So emacs tab just indents to random different places in
the vain hope that one of them might be correct.  For every line that you
pasted.

